1st we created a java application or java file we save it as extention .java. For example testgreeting.java
Then comes javac-- this is a compiler for java file that 
is responsible for compiling java program. it produces
bytecode file which is understood by jvm.
this bytecode file has an extention of .class.
Then comes jre.
When we install java we installed java jdk--java development kit.
jdk has all the helper files, compiler application,
jre- java runtime environment required by enduser
who execute the .class file.
Within jre we have java virtual mc which is responsible
for executing .class file.

jvm makes the java app platform-independent but it itself
is not system independent.

java architecture consist of mainly 3 things--
1. JVM 2. garbage collection, 3. JRE

open a new text editor:

class FirstProgram
{
	public static void main(String[] args){
	}
}

save this file just as the name of the class with 
the extention .java

main is the entry point of every application.
jvm for running the application search for the main method.


To install Java17 on Windows, you can follow these steps:

Download Java Development Kit (JDK):

Go to the Oracle website or the OpenJDK website.
Download the JDK installer for Windows. Choose the appropriate version (e.g., JDK 8, JDK 11, JDK 16) depending on your requirements. It's recommended to download the latest LTS (Long-Term Support) version for stability unless you specifically need features from a newer release.
Run the Installer:

Once the installer is downloaded, double-click on it to run.
Follow the installation wizard instructions.
Accept the License Agreement:

During the installation process, you'll be prompted to accept the license agreement. Read through it and accept it to proceed.
Choose Installation Directory:

You can choose the directory where Java will be installed. By default, it's usually installed in C:\Program Files\Java\.
Complete the Installation:

Follow any additional instructions provided by the installer to complete the installation process.
Set Up Environment Variables (Optional):

You may need to set up the JAVA_HOME environment variable to point to the JDK installation directory. This step is optional but recommended for advanced usage and development purposes.
To set JAVA_HOME:
Right-click on "This PC" or "My Computer" and select "Properties".
Click on "Advanced system settings".
In the System Properties window, click on the "Environment Variables" button.
Under System Variables, click "New" and add a variable named JAVA_HOME with the path to your JDK installation directory (e.g., C:\Program Files\Java\jdk1.8.0_211).
Click "OK" to save the changes.
Verify Installation:

Open Command Prompt (search for "cmd" in the Start menu).
Type java -version and press Enter. This command will display the installed Java version.
Additionally, you can also type javac -version to check the Java Compiler version.

Convention for naming the class name is PascalCase.

class FirstProgram
{
	public static void main(String[] args){
		System.out.println("Hello World");
	}
}


D:\coreJava1>javac -version
javac 17.0.1

now the code has been compiled. If you will go into the same folder, u will notice FirstProgram.class file there.

D:\coreJava1>java FirstProgram
Hello World


JVM tasks-load the class file,then it verifies the byte code so that if there are any changes in the byte file,
then verifier gives an error that the changes are externally done. Then the execution by runtime interpreter 
to execute the code.

See the introduction to java ppt.

class loader loads all the classses.

Just in time compiler is used for compiling the bytecode into executable code. Generally, the system class, string class is compiled by jit compiler.
And compiles them directly.


 